so next up I am super excited to welcome
Timothy Morton who is the Rita Shake of
the chair in English at Rice University
they've collaborated with uh artists uh
from all walks of life from Bjork to
Jennifer Walsh to Adam McKay Jeff
Bridges and Oliver Ellison even Pharrell
Williams makes that list which I learned
when I was putting this together
um uh
Morton co-wrote and appears in living in
Futures Past uh 2018 film about global
warming with with Mr Bridges and he's
the OB and he's the author of The
Libretto for the Opera Time Time by
Jennifer Walsh amongst publishing many
books that have helped us to Think
Through materiality object-oriented
oriented ontology and new forms of
ecological systems that are emerging
um they also run a Blog called the Eco
thought that I've been having a really
amazing time reading through and uh uh
I've been really enjoying that format in
any case I'm really pleased to introduce
Timothy
[Applause]
very very sweet introduction as a I'm
just going to lower the tone now so
sorry about that in advance all I've got
is a Sharpie and a sense of the
ridiculous you know thank you very much
for laughing by the way it's very
important for my ego that you keep on
doing that this is so much worse than
the selfie can we just like remove the
selfie thing because like that was a
magic thing that happened and you know
magic talking of magic it's like maybe
it's just like older science you know
like my wish list one of my wish things
on my wish list is like we see history
is like science science science science
religion science science science science
um but really I just want to talk about
being an idiot for a minute and I I
really am an idiot and I'm slightly
happy to be one
um sometimes
you know so but but like I didn't even
know the distance early warning was a
martial mccluen thing I thought it was a
rush thing
you know I thought this is going to be
like Eddie Lee and Alex life I'm just
I'm so sorry I'm luring the tone but I'm
just like a Philistine philosophy guy
and I do this dialogue with slavoy
cheese egg a few months ago and he said
something so awesome at the end for you
I reserved my highest compliment you are
not a complete idiot and so I said this
is the gold dude this is like I've been
tenure
money no no this is what I wanted my
life Timothy Morton is not at italics
complete idiot and I said can I have
this on the back of all my books now
from the future yes
so now I'm having arguments with the
presses like this is actually a really
cool thing that he said you know please
can I have it like
it's great right
idiot
um I've got five points to make one of
them says 0.1 a Germany nerves
um so that's just so I gave this lecture
in so
today and it was I was all nervous you
know because it was to like a group of
Scholars and I was trying to sound all
clever and stuff and I and for some
reason those nerves have really carried
on you know so feeling like an idiot and
feeling a bit nervous
um an emotion this is the title of the
lecture yeah or whatever this is the
thingy that I'm doing here an emotion is
a is like an idea from the future
phenomenologically speaking if you want
to use a posh sounding word for it yeah
all phenomenology really means is like
how something happens tells you what it
is
and how an emotion happens is well sure
an emotion is like a symptom of
something that happened to you in the
past in my case this German thing that
just freed me out you know that talking
of laughing which we won't I was in
Munich a few years ago and I said
something that I thought was funny and
they were completely blank so by the way
that was a really funny joke please
laugh and then they did it
[Music]
so like oh no please don't do that
um an emotion is an idea from the future
yeah of course it's a symptom of
something that happened in the past but
like why do you do therapy because
you're having a feeling you don't
understand it yet right and so this kind
of not yet quality is very important and
I want to be very clear about this like
the future isn't a DOT on a Wikipedia
line you know it's a it's the
possibility that things can be different
happening right now and it's actually
totally and utterly available in the
fact that you know data doesn't actually
ever ever
like capture the thing about which it's
the data you know data is a Latin word
meaning things that have been given yeah
you know like so I made all these funny
choices to wear these funny clothes and
like my face is a map of the acne that I
had when I was 19 years old right so
you're looking at the past here in
various different ways you know that
this is the the next point is going to
be about being a 50 year old philosopher
um but then on the other hand who the
hell is this Tim Morton guy and what is
this talk anyway and what is philosophy
and blah blah blah blah that's the
future right so kind of everything is
that right like this microphone it's
like well you you've got the shape and
the size and the history and that
whatever it is of the microphone plus
what is a microphone and what else could
we do with it and blah blah blah blah
that's the future right everywhere in
life is a kind of Crossroads where the
past and the future are kind of
overlapping without touching and you
know what my real job is actually
um
my real actual job is trying to help
Generation Z not to feel like they want
to die
when they get out of bed
you know and I think people like me have
a huge responsibility to actually do
that for them because it's like it's our
fault you know it's our fault and when
they say the previous generations
screwed it up for us what they kind of
mean is like the previous 12 and a half
thousand years
of generations screwed it up for for
them in the in the big picture you know
and then there's the settler colonialism
slavery part that America isn't even
slightly over yet you know and then
there's the you know very uncomfortable
capitalism steam engine fossil fuel part
of it that's obviously you know munching
down planet Earth and obviously
capitalism is a kind of algorithm an
algorithm is a recipe a recipe is based
on the past right the past is eating the
future literally right so how can
somebody like me keep the future open
especially for Generation Z you know who
seem to like to read my stuff you know
so I feel very responsible and I like I
try to be you know please let us not
conjure into existence another Greta
turnberg-like being to Outsource that
kind of stuff for us that's kind of we
should I should be ashamed of that that
people like me counter that into
existence and the other thing I should
be ashamed of is like clearly the way
people like me are talking isn't how
thing yeah this kind of mostly kind of
Eeyore thing that we do right like you
look at page one of the newspaper and
it's all these very very very scary new
facts and new data to you so page one is
telling you that you're stupid right and
then you turn to the middle of the
newspaper and somebody some kind of
Eeyore like being like me is basically
saying you're a bad person you're doing
this wrong you're thinking about it
wrongly you're bad you're evil stupid
and evil is not a good place from which
to launch any kind of progressive
politics right and and told you so is
the politics of failure it also nicely
overlaps with Evangelical Christianity
right like this whole kind of well you
should have prayed to Jesus more than
this apocalypse wouldn't have happened
right
um so you know kind of let's like how do
we not do that to ourselves and each
other and especially not to generation C
and now that I'm 50 years old
I understand what Aristotle meant when
he said that
you know you start to do nice philosophy
when you're that age because I think
it's because when you're younger you
sort of think philosophies about having
big Ideas you know especially boy
philosophers are really into that right
comparing the largeness of their idea to
the size of somebody else's idea seems
to be the point and then you get to this
point where it's like well actually it's
maybe it's about trying not to have an
idea and if you think about the word
philosophy it's really two emotions
right
you've got your philos that's an obvious
one because it's love right and and
Sophia is also an emotion you know if
you had a choice between philosophy is a
series of instructions or like little
wise sayings on a fortune cookie you
know or wisdom is a feeling I think
you're going to go with wisdom as a
Feeling
yeah and so you know really truly
philosophy should be about like inviting
the future to to beam into the into the
present moment right and it's kind of
like you're driving down the wisdom
Street in the in the love car The Love
mobile you know maybe it's a Tesla I
don't know
um and um the lamp posts are the ideas
right you don't want to point your car
at the Lamppost because you're going to
get wrapped around one right the point
is the movement yeah the point is to
keep keep the movement kind of flowing
um talking of which what have I got to
say next single cell symbiosis feel
okay
let's try that
um
150 300 and whatever million years later
after the first ever like whatever that
was popped into a single celled organism
there's like a conference of plants and
animals going wow that was so great that
was so great what happened because that
evolved into chloroplasts and now we can
photosynthesize and wear plants or that
evolved into mitochondria and now we can
like do our animal thing like moving
around and stuff because we have oxygen
but from the point of view of that
single-celled organism
right that's the future yeah
um and that there's a kind of
uncertainty there of kind of a radical
one like imagine if that single cell
organism could speak right and it's kind
of plopping through the ocean
and suddenly um
[__]
did I just swallow poison
you know have I just poisoned myself you
know you you have to have a a permeable
cell wall to be a life form right so
stuff can get inside you you know and
unless you want to build a wall and
interrogate the other to death you know
to make sure that only the right people
come through the wall that's more rigid
than anything to do with life and it's
really to do with the thing called the
death drive if you're into the
psychoanalysis side of life
um then you've got to realize that
actually this kind of fundamental
uncertainty kind of paranoia you know
is part of your empathy structure you
don't have to get rid of it the point is
not to get rid of this uncertainty or
the possibility that things could be
kind of scary or dangerous or hostile
the point is to sort of in be inviting
to to other life forms right so
fundamentally symbiosis is a sort of
based on a kind of uneasiness you know
there's a symbiotic relationship between
whatever that is in the uterus and the
mother's body right and they're both
trying to get rid of each other in a way
a birth is an abortion that failed right
like quite rightly at some point the
body goes [__] it I'm going to get rid
of this oh this organism that's like
sucking the life out of me you know
um so I think you know on the whole
um we've got everything that we need to
invite the future including all of the
negative emotions right because in a way
all the negative emotions the way you do
therapy you know I remember the first
time I went into therapy or maybe it was
like 25 years ago
um I paid six figures to have a normal
edible dad you know and it's like
everyone pays for their dad really so I
guess I paid for that Dad twice and um
you know the first therapy so I want to
chop my dad into a little bits you know
I'm really angry with him and um the
therapist was like wow that's
what have you got against that I was
really leveled by that like what oh you
know because it's like how you are
thinking something or how you're doing
something kind of is what you're doing
you know the how is the what which is
just basic science yeah
but also
um okay so point four is um so logically
let's talk about Satan now
um but maybe I should go to 0.5 which is
to do with stem
you know
um Humanities you know we we do
ourselves a a disservice in the Arts and
the humanities by kind of pleading in a
scientistic game Space to be liked by by
the government and and by ideology you
know
um because in fact what what those
things are about is how to have a fact
at all
right biology is about how to make facts
that are biology true so you can make
your interpretation of the data which is
what a fact is in the Modern Age and you
send it to Nature and the editorial
board says you can publish it even
though we don't agree with you because
it's logically coherent right so you
train to make biology facts or astronomy
facts or whatever but stem is kind of
forcing us to miss a whole big spot here
which is like how to have a fact at all
kind of based on almost nothing you know
the humanities and the Arts of the stem
right like in the Middle Ages they got
it right they called it the Trivium
which is we get the word trivial from
that but in the beginning it means
three-legged stool yeah and first of all
it's like how do you work the operating
system of meaning it's called grammar
right and then how do you make meanings
that are coherent that don't suck
um it's called logic and then how do you
convey those meanings to yourself and
other people in a way that works that's
called rhetoric right and then you do
astronomy or then you do theology
because it was considered a science in
those days or natural philosophy or
whatever right but like instead of
trying to turn kids into like a billions
of times slower version of what their
iPhone can do already so that 10 years
from now when they're grown-ups they can
compete with these iPhones that are now
trillions of times faster calculation
speed like what's wrong with this mixer
you know calculation and computation is
not the same thing as as math right very
simple quick check because it's like how
to teach critique of pure reason in five
seconds show me the number one
that's your finger
that's not the number one that's you so
this is kant's example right it's like
when you try to figure out like what a
number is all you do is you point to
things and you hold up fingers and
that's not number
you know
he was great at asking stupid questions
right like like people who are stupid
questions are great you know like Marx
like how come you can make money you
know you buy a house and it goes up you
think I'm gonna buy a million houses
with this but the other guy's house also
went up so nothing's happened so how can
you make money like how does that even
work and then and then Darwin like how
how come these finches have got these
different shapes of beak on these
different Islands it's really like uh
you know can't how can you be right like
wait a minute like no one ever asked
this question before like how can you be
right about stuff
um
yeah thank you for laughing at this
really it's it it's all I've got all
I've got you know like I I was in the
shop and I bought these trainers I
didn't even know what they were and the
guy was sold me them and like five
minutes later I was giving a thousand
dollars for these trainers that's how
much of an idiot I understood oh I
really want these shoes that look like
socks you know and he said um you know
what do you do for your job and I said
well I teach stuff at University and he
said do you ever give people laughs I
said no I never give people F actually I
always try to help them revise their
work so they get the grade they want at
the end and he fist bumped me and I
thought wow I'm nominating you for
president of the United States
so let's just end this by talking about
Satan for a minute and then we can all
have lunch
um
so you know God if they exist
is some kind of Master like being you
know you can never serve them correctly
which is why you have religion yeah
now imagine a servant
who does exactly what you tell them to
do
right exactly what you tell them
to do
right like every story you've ever heard
about Satan right or the magic fish
but also the biosphere you know the
biosphere does exactly what you tell it
to do right you wash your hands with
antibacterial soap you force the
bacteria to evolve You by an avocado
from Chile you just wasted a lot of
fossil fuels right living in the
biosphere essentially is like living
inside of Satan's body
and doing things to do with ecology is
like making it and whenever I say Satan
people smile this is the idea right
you've got to say you're going to talk
about Satanism because it makes people
smile thank you very much
oh question
I got so scared thank you so much Tim
um
you know something that struck me is
obviously you are a teacher you're a
professor and you know you're teaching
students and you're talking about these
ideas about facts and the truth and our
feelings so how do you navigate
knowledge sharing and educating a new
generation amidst
this mess
oh my gosh
um
seriously very I I pay a lot of
attention to it possibly so much that I
can't quite articulate exactly what it
is that I do but for example so you know
my daughter she's just turned 18 and she
came in the kitchen a few months ago and
she was crying and she'd been looking at
Reddit you know and she's like Daddy we
live in hell
you know and I was like oh my God
parenting skills 101. ah quick quick and
I said okay we do
um so here's the you're right so first
of all you just go yeah that worked
um but you know Oliver the cat also is
in hell right and the trees outside are
in in hell and so how do we take care of
Oliver because Oliver's also in hell and
you can sort of see the tension kind of
going down inside her right like
Generation Z feel paralyzed you know and
people like me don't help because our
idea of being clever is making you feel
like paralyzed like you have no idea how
powerful ideology is you have no idea
how screwed everything is please give me
five thousand dollars in a nice hotel
and by the way my books at the back
you're screwed like why is that like how
do we argue ourselves into thinking that
was like a left-wingy thing to to do to
people
yeah sure
since we do um
art stuff here
for some reason stuff yeah uh I don't
know we were talking a second ago you
had this little cool book called all
Arts is ecological and I know you've
written about art and magic and stuff
for a long time and so I just wanted to
poke you on like
why should we do you know like is there
any thoughts on like how this fits into
the picture it's super super simple art
actually is the future yeah artists from
the future right the future is the
possibility that things can be different
not the predictable future which is just
like building a thing out into the abyss
like Wiley Coyote yeah but the actual
real future
you know like when is this sentence
going to end balloon elephant
parenthesis period exclamation mark dot
dot right that's that's basically how I
teach deconstruction now you know
um so art is the future and I'm like the
janitor of the of the future based that
sort of philosopher is
okay see more do you have another one
you wanna is this a mic drop all right
yeah that's it I'm not no there you go
um
it's lunch time
[Applause]